Section 1: Lab Overview
=======================

In this lab, you will start with a basic Ubuntu 16.04.4 server instance
running on an IBM z13 Server that resides in the IBM Washington Systems
Center in Herndon, Virginia. During the installation process for this
instance, no extra packages were selected for installation beyond the
minimum offered by the installer. Ubuntu updates were applied such that
at this time the level of Ubuntu is *16.04.4 LTS* and the Linux kernel
is at level *4.4.0-112*.

You will install the necessary software prerequisites to build and test
a Hyperledger Fabric network, including

-   Docker and Docker Compose
-   Node.js and npm
-   Golang compiler

\* other necessary packages During the lab, you will download three
Hyperledger Fabric source code repositories, build the necessary
artifacts from the source code, and run two comprehensive end-to-end
tests to verify that your Hyperledger Fabric installation is in working
order.

You will first download the *fabric* repository, which contains the
source code for the core functionality of Hyperledger Fabric. Using this
source code, you will build the Docker images that comprise the core
Hyperledger Fabric services. Then you will run an end-to-end test that
utilizes the Hyperledger Fabric Command Line Interface (CLI) to verify
that everything is working correctly.

Then you will download two more Hyperledger Fabric source code
repositories, *fabric-ca* and *fabric-sdk-node*, and build from this
source the artifacts necessary to run a second, more comprehensive
end-to-end test of the Fabric Node.js SDK.

â€ƒ Section 2: Install prerequisite software needed by Hyperledger Fabric
=====================================================================

In this section, you will install a subset of the software prerequisites
mentioned in the Lab Overview section- the major software prerequisites
that will be necessary to run the end-to-end command line interface
(CLI) test in Section 3. You will install:

-   Docker
-   PIP, a python installer program (needed to install Docker Compose)
-   curl (used to download PIP)
-   Docker Compose

\* Golang compiler **Step 2.1:** Log in to your assigned Ubuntu 16.04.4
Linux on IBM Z instance using the PuTTY icon on your workstation using
the IP address assigned to your team. You will be greeted with a message
like this:

    Welcome to Ubuntu 16.04.4 LTS (GNU/Linux 4.4.0-112-generic s390x)

     * Documentation:  https://help.ubuntu.com
     * Management:     https://landscape.canonical.com
     * Support:        https://ubuntu.com/advantage
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ 

**Step 2.2:** This system is a relatively "clean" Ubuntu 16.04.4
instance- "clean" in the sense that after this instance was created, no
additional software was installed. You will therefore need to install
several software prerequisites. The first thing you will install is
Docker. Docker is a software container platform that is an integral part
of Hyperledger Fabric. *Smart contracts*, also known as *chaincode*, run
as Docker containers. In addition, you will run the Hyperledger Fabric
processes themselves in Docker containers. You could choose to run the
Hyperledger Fabric processes natively on your host operating system,
that is, *not* in Docker containers, but even if you did this you would
still need Docker to run chaincode. For this lab, you will use Docker
containers for *both* the chaincode and the Hyperledger Fabric
processes.

Issue this *which* command, which attempts to find the *docker*
executable. The fact that it gives no response other than returning to
the command prompt indicates that the program *docker* is not found:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ which docker
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ 

**Note:** Some Linux distributions produce no output if the executable
is not found, as in the above example. Other Linux distributions may
produce an error message stating that the executable is not found.

**Step 2.3:** You will be using root authority for several commands
throughout this lab. You can tell when you have root authority by
observing the command prompt- it will end with a '\#' when you have root
authority and it will end with a '\$' when you do not. Use the *sudo*
command to switch to the root user. Observe the change in the command
prompt after you enter this command:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ sudo su -
    root@ubuntu16044:~# 

**Step 2.4:** Ubuntu provides a popular software package manager named
*apt*, which stands for *Advanced Package Tool*. You will be using *apt*
throughout this lab to install various software packages. The first
thing you need to do is install the Docker Community Edition (CE). This
software is provided by Docker, so the next several steps will add a
repository managed by Docker to your system's list of repositories so
that you can install Docker CE. Enter this command to update the *apt*
package index:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# apt-get update
    Hit:1 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial InRelease
    Hit:2 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-updates InRelease                             
    Hit:3 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-backports InRelease                           
    Hit:4 http://ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-security InRelease         
    Reading package lists... Done     

**Step 2.5:** Install packages to allow *apt* to use a repository over
HTTPS:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# apt-get install -y apt-transport-https ca-certificates curl software-properties-common
    Reading package lists... Done
    Building dependency tree       
    Reading state information... Done
    apt-transport-https is already the newest version (1.2.26).
    ca-certificates is already the newest version (20170717~16.04.1).
    The following additional packages will be installed:
      python3-pycurl python3-software-properties unattended-upgrades xz-utils
    Suggested packages:
      libcurl4-gnutls-dev python-pycurl-doc python3-pycurl-dbg bsd-mailx mail-transport-agent
    The following NEW packages will be installed:
      curl python3-pycurl python3-software-properties software-properties-common unattended-upgrades xz-utils
    0 upgraded, 6 newly installed, 0 to remove and 3 not upgraded.
    Need to get 317 kB of archives.
    After this operation, 1552 kB of additional disk space will be used.
    Get:1 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-updates/main s390x curl s390x 7.47.0-1ubuntu2.7 [137 kB]
    Get:2 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial/main s390x python3-pycurl s390x 7.43.0-1ubuntu1 [39.9 kB]
    Get:3 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-updates/main s390x python3-software-properties all 0.96.20.7 [20.3 kB]
    Get:4 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-updates/main s390x software-properties-common all 0.96.20.7 [9452 B]
    Get:5 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial/main s390x xz-utils s390x 5.1.1alpha+20120614-2ubuntu2 [78.4 kB]
    Get:6 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-updates/main s390x unattended-upgrades all 0.90ubuntu0.9 [32.3 kB]
    Fetched 317 kB in 0s (1572 kB/s)               
    Preconfiguring packages ...
    Selecting previously unselected package curl.
    (Reading database ... 64250 files and directories currently installed.)
    Preparing to unpack .../curl_7.47.0-1ubuntu2.7_s390x.deb ...
    Unpacking curl (7.47.0-1ubuntu2.7) ...
    Selecting previously unselected package python3-pycurl.
    Preparing to unpack .../python3-pycurl_7.43.0-1ubuntu1_s390x.deb ...
    Unpacking python3-pycurl (7.43.0-1ubuntu1) ...
    Selecting previously unselected package python3-software-properties.
    Preparing to unpack .../python3-software-properties_0.96.20.7_all.deb ...
    Unpacking python3-software-properties (0.96.20.7) ...
    Selecting previously unselected package software-properties-common.
    Preparing to unpack .../software-properties-common_0.96.20.7_all.deb ...
    Unpacking software-properties-common (0.96.20.7) ...
    Selecting previously unselected package xz-utils.
    Preparing to unpack .../xz-utils_5.1.1alpha+20120614-2ubuntu2_s390x.deb ...
    Unpacking xz-utils (5.1.1alpha+20120614-2ubuntu2) ...
    Selecting previously unselected package unattended-upgrades.
    Preparing to unpack .../unattended-upgrades_0.90ubuntu0.9_all.deb ...
    Unpacking unattended-upgrades (0.90ubuntu0.9) ...
    Processing triggers for man-db (2.7.5-1) ...
    Processing triggers for dbus (1.10.6-1ubuntu3.3) ...
    Processing triggers for systemd (229-4ubuntu21.1) ...
    Processing triggers for ureadahead (0.100.0-19) ...
    Setting up curl (7.47.0-1ubuntu2.7) ...
    Setting up python3-pycurl (7.43.0-1ubuntu1) ...
    Setting up python3-software-properties (0.96.20.7) ...
    Setting up software-properties-common (0.96.20.7) ...
    Setting up xz-utils (5.1.1alpha+20120614-2ubuntu2) ...
    update-alternatives: using /usr/bin/xz to provide /usr/bin/lzma (lzma) in auto mode
    Setting up unattended-upgrades (0.90ubuntu0.9) ...

    Creating config file /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/50unattended-upgrades with new version
    Synchronizing state of unattended-upgrades.service with SysV init with /lib/systemd/systemd-sysv-install...
    Executing /lib/systemd/systemd-sysv-install enable unattended-upgrades
    Processing triggers for dbus (1.10.6-1ubuntu3.3) ...
    Processing triggers for systemd (229-4ubuntu21.1) ...
    Processing triggers for ureadahead (0.100.0-19) ...
    root@ubuntu16044:~#

**Step 2.6:** Add Docker's official GPG key:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg | apt-key add -
    OK
    root@ubuntu16044:~#

**Step 2.7:** Verify that the key fingerprint is *9DC8 5822 9FC7 DD38
854A E2D8 8D81 803C 0EBF CD88*:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# apt-key fingerprint 0EBFCD88
    pub   4096R/0EBFCD88 2017-02-22
          Key fingerprint = 9DC8 5822 9FC7 DD38 854A  E2D8 8D81 803C 0EBF CD88
    uid                  Docker Release (CE deb) <docker@docker.com>
    sub   4096R/F273FCD8 2017-02-22

    root@ubuntu16044:~#

**Step 2.8:** Enter the following command to add the *stable* repository
that is provided by Docker:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# add-apt-repository "deb [arch=s390x] https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu $(lsb_release -cs) stable"
    root@ubuntu16044:~#

**Step 2.9:** Update the *apt* package index again:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# apt-get update
    Hit:1 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial InRelease
    Get:2 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-updates InRelease [102 kB]                    
    Get:3 http://us.ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-backports InRelease [102 kB]                           
    Get:4 http://ports.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-ports xenial-security InRelease [102 kB] 
    Get:5 https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial InRelease [65.8 kB]
    Get:6 https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial/stable s390x Packages [2601 B]
    Fetched 375 kB in 0s (782 kB/s)     
    Reading package lists... Done

**Step 2.10:** Enter this command to show some information about the
Docker package. This command won't actually install anything:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# apt-cache policy docker-ce
    docker-ce:
      Installed: (none)
      Candidate: 17.12.1~ce-0~ubuntu
      Version table:
         17.12.1~ce-0~ubuntu 500
            500 https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial/stable s390x Packages
         17.12.0~ce-0~ubuntu 500
            500 https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial/stable s390x Packages
         17.09.1~ce-0~ubuntu 500
            500 https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial/stable s390x Packages
         17.09.0~ce-0~ubuntu 500
            500 https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial/stable s390x Packages
         17.06.2~ce-0~ubuntu 500
            500 https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial/stable s390x Packages
         17.06.1~ce-0~ubuntu 500
            500 https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial/stable s390x Packages
         17.06.0~ce-0~ubuntu 500
            500 https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial/stable s390x Packages
     root@ubuntu16044:~# 

Some key takeaways from the command output:

-   Docker is not currently installed *(Installed: (none))*
-   *17.12.0\~ce-0\~ubuntu* is the candidate version to install- it is
    the latest version available
-   When you install the software, you will be going out to the Internet
    to the *download.docker.com* domain to get the software.

**Step 2.11:** Enter this *apt-get* command to install Docker CE version
17.06.2. It is very important to install this particular version. (Enter
Y when prompted to continue):

    root@ubuntu16044:~# apt-get install docker-ce=17.06.2~ce-0~ubuntu
    Reading package lists... Done
    Building dependency tree       
    Reading state information... Done
    The following additional packages will be installed:
      aufs-tools cgroupfs-mount git git-man liberror-perl libltdl7 patch
    Suggested packages:
      mountall git-daemon-run | git-daemon-sysvinit git-doc git-el git-email git-gui gitk gitweb git-arch git-cvs git-mediawiki  git-svn diffutils-doc
    The following NEW packages will be installed:
      aufs-tools cgroupfs-mount docker-ce git git-man liberror-perl libltdl7 patch
    0 upgraded, 8 newly installed, 0 to remove and 3 not upgraded.
    Need to get 22.7 MB of archives.
    After this operation, 125 MB of additional disk space will be used.
    Do you want to continue? [Y/n] Y
      .
      .   (remaining output not shown here)
      .

Observe that not only was Docker installed, but so were its
prerequisites that were not already installed.

**Step 2.12:** Issue the *which* command again and this time it will
tell you where it found the just-installed docker program:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# which docker
    /usr/bin/docker

**Step 2.13:** Enter the *docker version* command and you should see
that version *17.06.2-ce* was installed:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# docker version
    Client:
     Version:      17.06.2-ce
     API version:  1.30
     Go version:   go1.8.3
     Git commit:   cec0b72
     Built:        Tue Sep  5 20:02:38 2017
     OS/Arch:      linux/s390x

    Server:
     Version:      17.06.2-ce
     API version:  1.30 (minimum version 1.12)
     Go version:   go1.8.3
     Git commit:   cec0b72
     Built:        Tue Sep  5 20:00:51 2017
     OS/Arch:      linux/s390x
     Experimental: false

**Step 2.14:** Enter *docker info* to see even more information about
your Docker environment:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# docker info
    Containers: 0
     Running: 0
     Paused: 0
     Stopped: 0
    Images: 0
    Server Version: 17.06.2-ce
    Storage Driver: aufs
     Root Dir: /var/lib/docker/aufs
     Backing Filesystem: extfs
     Dirs: 0
     Dirperm1 Supported: true
    Logging Driver: json-file
    Cgroup Driver: cgroupfs
    Plugins: 
     Volume: local
     Network: bridge host macvlan null overlay
     Log: awslogs fluentd gcplogs gelf journald json-file logentries splunk syslog
    Swarm: inactive
    Runtimes: runc
    Default Runtime: runc
    Init Binary: docker-init
    containerd version: 6e23458c129b551d5c9871e5174f6b1b7f6d1170
    runc version: 810190ceaa507aa2727d7ae6f4790c76ec150bd2
    init version: 949e6fa
    Security Options:
     apparmor
    Kernel Version: 4.4.0-112-generic
    Operating System: Ubuntu 16.04.4 LTS
    OSType: linux
    Architecture: s390x
    CPUs: 2
    Total Memory: 1.717GiB
    Name: ubuntu16044
    ID: NOQT:SZJX:HW5J:3PML:URFT:2WH7:L63S:BLBD:LM4C:NFEB:UGV2:MALK
    Docker Root Dir: /var/lib/docker
    Debug Mode (client): false
    Debug Mode (server): false
    Registry: https://index.docker.io/v1/
    Experimental: false
    Insecure Registries:
     127.0.0.0/8
    Live Restore Enabled: false

    WARNING: No swap limit support

**Step 2.15:** After the Docker installation, non-root users cannot run
Docker commands. One way to get around this for a non-root userid is to
add that userid to a group named *docker*. Enter this command to add the
*bcuser* userid to the group *docker*:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# usermod -aG docker bcuser

**Note:** This method of authorizing a non-root userid to enter Docker
commands, while suitable for a controlled sandbox environment, may not
be suitable for a production environemnt due to security considerations.

**Step 2.16:** Exit so that you are no longer running as root:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# exit
    logout
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$

**Step 2.17:** Even though *bcuser* was just added to the *docker*
group, you will have to log out and then log back in again for this
change to take effect. To prove this, before you log out, enter the
*docker info* command and you will receive a permissions error:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ docker info
    Got permission denied while trying to connect to the Docker daemon socket at unix:///var/run/docker.sock: Get  http://%2Fvar%2Frun%2Fdocker.sock/v1.30/info: dial unix /var/run/docker.sock: connect: permission denied

**Step 2.18:** Now log out:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ exit
    logout
    Connection to 192.168.22.119 closed.

**Step 2.19:** Log in again. (These instructions show logging in again
using *ssh* from a command shell. If you are using PuTTY you may need to
start a new PuTTY session and log in):

    $ ssh bcuser@192.168.22.119
    Welcome to Ubuntu 16.04.4 LTS (GNU/Linux 4.4.0-112-generic s390x)

     * Documentation:  https://help.ubuntu.com
     * Management:     https://landscape.canonical.com
     * Support:        https://ubuntu.com/advantage
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ 

before you log out and then again after you log in. (You will need to
start a new PuTTY session after you logged out so that you can get back
in).

**Step 2.20:** Now try *docker info* and this time it should work from
your non-root userid:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ docker info
    Containers: 0
     Running: 0
     Paused: 0
     Stopped: 0
    Images: 0
    Server Version: 17.06.2-ce
    Storage Driver: aufs
     Root Dir: /var/lib/docker/aufs
     Backing Filesystem: extfs
     Dirs: 0
     Dirperm1 Supported: true
    Logging Driver: json-file
    Cgroup Driver: cgroupfs
    Plugins: 
     Volume: local
     Network: bridge host macvlan null overlay
     Log: awslogs fluentd gcplogs gelf journald json-file logentries splunk syslog
    Swarm: inactive
    Runtimes: runc
    Default Runtime: runc
    Init Binary: docker-init
    containerd version: 6e23458c129b551d5c9871e5174f6b1b7f6d1170
    runc version: 810190ceaa507aa2727d7ae6f4790c76ec150bd2
    init version: 949e6fa
    Security Options:
     apparmor
    Kernel Version: 4.4.0-112-generic
    Operating System: Ubuntu 16.04.4 LTS
    OSType: linux
    Architecture: s390x
    CPUs: 2
    Total Memory: 1.717GiB
    Name: ubuntu16044
    ID: NOQT:SZJX:HW5J:3PML:URFT:2WH7:L63S:BLBD:LM4C:NFEB:UGV2:MALK
    Docker Root Dir: /var/lib/docker
    Debug Mode (client): false
    Debug Mode (server): false
    Registry: https://index.docker.io/v1/
    Experimental: false
    Insecure Registries:
     127.0.0.0/8
    Live Restore Enabled: false 

    WARNING: No swap limit support

**Step 2.21:** You will need to get right back in as root to install
*Docker Compose*. Docker Compose is a tool provided by Docker to help
make it easier to run an application that consists of multiple Docker
containers. On some platforms, it is installed along with the Docker
package but on Linux on IBM Z it is installed separately. It is written
in Python and you will install it with a tool called Pip. But first you
will install Pip itself! You will do this as root, so enter this again:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ sudo su -
    root@ubuntu16044:~#

**Step 2.22:** Install the *python-pip* package which will provide a
tool named *Pip* which is used to install Python packages from a public
repository:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# apt-get -y install python-pip

This will bring in a lot of prerequisites and will produce a lot of
output which is not shown here.

**Step 2.23:** Run this command just to verify that *docker-compose* is
not currently available on the system:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# which docker-compose
    root@ubuntu16044:~# 

**Step 2.24:** Use Pip to install Docker Compose:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# pip install docker-compose

You can ignore the suggestion at the end of the output of this command
to consider upgrading *pip*- that isn\'t necessary for this lab.

**Step 2.25:** There was a bunch of output from the prior step I didn't
show, but if your install works, you should feel pretty good about the
output from this command:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# docker-compose --version
    docker-compose version 1.19.0, build 9e633ef

**Note:** If the version of Docker Compose shown in your output differs
from what is shown here, that\'s okay.

**Step 2.26:** Leave root behind and become a normal user again:

    root@ubuntu16044:~# exit
    logout
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$

**Step 2.27:** You won't have to log out and log back in, like you did
with Docker, in order to use Docker Compose, and to prove it, check for
the version again now that you are no longer root:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ docker-compose --version
    docker-compose version 1.19.0, build 9e633ef

**Step 2.28:** The next thing you are going to install is the *Golang*
programming language. You are going to install Golang version 1.9.3. Go
to the /tmp directory:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ cd /tmp
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$

**Step 2.29:** Use *wget* to get the compressed file that contains the
Golang compiler and tools. And now is a good time to tell you that from
here on out I will just call Golang what everybody else usually calls
it- *Go*. Go figure. :: <bcuser@ubuntu16044>:/tmp\$ wget
\--no-check-certificate
<https://storage.googleapis.com/golang/go1.9.3.linux-s390x.tar.gz>
\--2018-03-19 18:38:40\--
<https://storage.googleapis.com/golang/go1.9.3.linux-s390x.tar.gz>
Resolving storage.googleapis.com (storage.googleapis.com)\...
172.217.2.48, 2607:f8b0:4002:808::2010 Connecting to
storage.googleapis.com (storage.googleapis.com):443\... connected. HTTP
request sent, awaiting response\... 200 OK Length: 88969164 (85M)
\[application/octet-stream\] Saving to: \'go1.9.3.linux-s390x.tar.gz\'

> go1.9.3.linux-s390x.tar.gz
> 100%\[=====================================================================\>\]
> 84.85M 15.8MB/s in 5.6s
>
> 2018-03-19 18:38:46 (15.1 MB/s) - \'go1.9.3.linux-s390x.tar.gz\' saved
> \[88969164/88969164\]

**Step 2.30:** Enter the following command which will extract the files
into the /tmp directory, and provide lots and lots of output. (It's the
*'v'* in *-xvf* which got all chatty, or *verbose*, on you):

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$ tar -xvf go1.9.3.linux-s390x.tar.gz
      .
      .  (output not shown here)
      .

**Step 2.31:** You will move the extracted stuff, which is all under
*/tmp/go*, into */opt*, and for that you will need root authority.
Whereas before you were instructed to enter *sudo su* -- which
effectively logged you in as root until you exited, you can issue a
single command with *sudo* which executes it as root and then returns
control back to you in non-root mode. Enter this command:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$ sudo mv -iv go /opt 
     'go' -> '/opt/go'

**Step 2.32:** You need to set a couple of Go-related environment
variables. First check to verify that they are not set already:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$ env | grep GO

That command, *grep*, is looking for any lines of input that contain the
characters *GO*. Its input is the output of the previous *env* command,
which prints all of your environment variables. Right now you should not
see any output.

**Step 2.33:** You will set these values now. You will make these
changes in a special hidden file named *.bashrc* in your home directory.
Change to your home directory:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$ cd ~  # that is a tilde ~ character I know it is hard to see 
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$

**Step 2.34:** Enter the *cp* command to make a backup copy of *.bashrc*
to allow a recovery in the infinitesimally slim chance that you make a
mistake in the subsequent five steps which will append information to
*.bashrc*. I know you wouldn\'t ever make a mistake, but the joker
sitting next to you will. Trust me.:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ cp -ipv .bashrc .bashrc_orig
    '.bashrc' -> '.bashrc_orig'

**Step 2.35:** The next five steps- *Steps 2.35 through 2.39* - are each
*echo* commands which will append to the end of *.bashrc*. The first and
last of these steps just adds a blank line for readability. Enter these
exactly as shown in each step. It is critical that you use two
'greater-than' signs, i.e., '\>\>', when you enter them. This appends
the arguments of the *echo* commands to the end of the *.bashrc* file.
If you only enter one '\>' sign, you will overwrite the file's contents.
I'd rather you not do that. Although *Step 2.34* does create a backup
copy of the file, just in case. So first, add a blank line:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ echo '' >> .bashrc   # that is two single quotes, not one double-quote

**Step 2.36:** Add this line to set your *GOPATH* environment variable:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ echo export GOPATH=/home/bcuser/git >> .bashrc

**Step 2.37:** Add this line to set your *GOROOT* environment variable:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ echo export GOROOT=/opt/go >> .bashrc

**Step 2.38:** Add this line to update your *PATH* environment variable:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ echo export PATH=/opt/go/bin:/home/bcuser/bin:\$PATH >> .bashrc

**Step 2.39:** Finally, add another blank line for readability:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ echo '' >> .bashrc  

**Step 2.40:** Let's see how you did. Enter this command:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ head .bashrc
    # ~/.bashrc: executed by bash(1) for non-login shells.
    # see /usr/share/doc/bash/examples/startup-files (in the package bash-doc)
    # for examples

    # If not running interactively, don't do anything
    case $- in
        *i*) ;;
          *) return;;
    esac

If your output looked like the above, congratulations, you did not stomp
all over your file. *head* prints the top of the file. Had you made and
mistake and used a single \'\>\' instead two '\>\>' like I told you, you
would have whacked this stuff. Your stuff is at the bottom. If *head*
prints the top of the file, guess what command prints the bottom of the
file.

**Step 2.41:** Try this:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ tail -5 .bashrc

    export GOPATH=/home/bcuser/git
    export GOROOT=/opt/go
    export PATH=/opt/go/bin:$PATH

**Step 2.42:** These changes will take effect next time you log in, but
you can make them take effect immediately by entering this:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ source .bashrc

**Step 2.43:** Try this to see if your changes took:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ env | grep GO
    GOROOT=/opt/go
    GOPATH=/home/bcuser/git

**Step 2.44:** Then try this:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ go version
    go version go1.9.3 linux/s390x

**Recap:** Before you move on, here is a summary of the major tasks you
performed in this section.

-   You installed Docker and added *bcuser* to the *docker* group so
    that *bcuser* can issue Docker commands
-   You installed Docker Compose (and Pip, which was needed to install
    it)
-   You installed Go
-   You updated your *.bashrc* profile to make necessary environment
    changes

In the next section, you will download the Hyperledger Fabric source
code, build it, and run a comprehensive verification test using the
Hyperledger Fabric Command Line Interface, or CLI.

Section 3: Download, build and test the Hyperledger Fabric CLI
==============================================================

In this section, you will:

-   Install some support packages using the Ubuntu package manager,
    *apt-get*
-   Download the source code repository containing the core Hyperledger
    Fabric functionality
-   Use the source code to build Docker images that contain the core
    Hyperledger Fabric functionality
-   Test for success by running the comprehensive end-to-end CLI test.

**Step 3.1:** There are some software packages necessary to be able to
successfully build the Hyperledger Fabric source code. Install them with
this command. Observe the output, not shown here, to see the different
packages installed:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ sudo apt-get install -y build-essential libltdl3-dev

**Step 3.2:** Create the following directory path with this command.
Make sure you are in your home directory when you enter it. If you are
following these steps exactly, you already are. If you strayed away from
your home directory, I\'m assuming you\'re smart enough to get back
there. (Or see *Step 2.33* if you accidentally left home and are too
embarrassed to ask for help):

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ mkdir -p git/src/github.com/hyperledger
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$

**Step 3.3:** Navigate to the directory you just created:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ cd git/src/github.com/hyperledger/
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger$

**Step 3.4:** Use the software tool *git* to download the source code of
the Hyperledger Fabric core package from the official place where it
lives. The *-b v1.1.0* argument specifies that you want the v1.1.0
release level:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger$ git clone -b v1.1.0 https://gerrit.hyperledger.org/r/fabric
    Cloning into 'fabric'...
    remote: Counting objects: 4376, done
    remote: Finding sources: 100% (63/63)
    remote: Total 58781 (delta 9), reused 58753 (delta 9)
    Receiving objects: 100% (58781/58781), 75.03 MiB | 2.21 MiB/s, done.
    Resolving deltas: 100% (26968/26968), done.
    Checking connectivity... done.
    Note: checking out '523f644b909d5699fbd992a011e7ed6031e96a9a'.

    You are in 'detached HEAD' state. You can look around, make experimental
    changes and commit them, and you can discard any commits you make in this
    state without impacting any branches by performing another checkout.

    If you want to create a new branch to retain commits you create, you may
    do so (now or later) by using -b with the checkout command again. Example:

      git checkout -b <new-branch-name>

*Note:* The numbers in the various output messages may differ from what
you see listed here, and this may be the case for any other times you do
a *git clone* in the remainder of these labs.

**Step 3.5:** Switch to the *fabric* directory, which is the top-level
directory of where the *git* command put the code it just downloaded:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger$ cd fabric
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric$

**Step 3.6:** You will use a program called *make*, which is used to
build software projects, in order to build Docker images for Hyperledger
Fabric. But first, run this command to show that your system does not
currently have any Docker images stored on it. The only output you will
see is the column headings:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric$ docker images
    REPOSITORY          TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED             SIZE

**Step 3.7:** That will change in a few minutes. Enter the following
command, which will build the Hyperledger Fabric images. You can 'wrap'
the *make* command, which is what will do all the work, in a *time*
command, which will give you a measure of the time, including 'wall
clock' time, required to build the images (See how it took over five
minutes on my system. It will probably take you a similar amount of
time, so either check your email, fiddle with your smartphone, watch the
output scroll by, or go to the bathroom really really quick):

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric$ time make docker
      .
      .  (output not shown here)
      .
    real   7m45.520s
    user   0m7.680s
    sys    0m0.810s
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric$ 

**Step 3.8:** Run *docker images* again and you will see several Docker
images that were just created. You will notice that many of the Docker
images at the top of the output were created in the last few minutes.
These were created by the *make docker* command. The Docker images that
are several days or weeks old were downloaded from the Hyperledger
Fabric\'s public DockerHub repository. Your output should look similar
to that shown here, although the tags will be different if your
instructor gave you a different level to checkout, and your *image ids*
will be different either way, for those images that were created in the
last few minutes:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric$ docker images
    REPOSITORY                     TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED              SIZE
    hyperledger/fabric-tools       latest              2669e1ed5d68        About a minute ago   1.37GB
    hyperledger/fabric-tools       s390x-1.1.0         2669e1ed5d68        About a minute ago   1.37GB
    hyperledger/fabric-testenv     latest              d8919b8bd414        About a minute ago   1.45GB
    hyperledger/fabric-testenv     s390x-1.1.0         d8919b8bd414        About a minute ago   1.45GB
    hyperledger/fabric-buildenv    latest              47e2cffaac5b        2 minutes ago        1.36GB
    hyperledger/fabric-buildenv    s390x-1.1.0         47e2cffaac5b        2 minutes ago        1.36GB
    hyperledger/fabric-orderer     latest              f80d36c050c6        2 minutes ago        203MB
    hyperledger/fabric-orderer     s390x-1.1.0         f80d36c050c6        2 minutes ago        203MB
    hyperledger/fabric-peer        latest              f4f7d97666d1        2 minutes ago        210MB
    hyperledger/fabric-peer        s390x-1.1.0         f4f7d97666d1        2 minutes ago        210MB
    hyperledger/fabric-javaenv     latest              6f236f0a0f7d        3 minutes ago        1.38GB
    hyperledger/fabric-javaenv     s390x-1.1.0         6f236f0a0f7d        3 minutes ago        1.38GB
    hyperledger/fabric-ccenv       latest              eb82f367e77a        3 minutes ago        1.3GB
    hyperledger/fabric-ccenv       s390x-1.1.0         eb82f367e77a        3 minutes ago        1.3GB
    hyperledger/fabric-zookeeper   latest              103c1abf45ff        4 weeks ago          1.34GB
    hyperledger/fabric-zookeeper   s390x-0.4.6         103c1abf45ff        4 weeks ago          1.34GB
    hyperledger/fabric-kafka       latest              db99e941fe20        4 weeks ago          1.35GB
    hyperledger/fabric-kafka       s390x-0.4.6         db99e941fe20        4 weeks ago          1.35GB
    hyperledger/fabric-couchdb     latest              2aecbce9f786        4 weeks ago          1.56GB
    hyperledger/fabric-couchdb     s390x-0.4.6         2aecbce9f786        4 weeks ago          1.56GB
    hyperledger/fabric-baseimage   s390x-0.4.6         234d9beb079b        4 weeks ago          1.27GB
    hyperledger/fabric-baseos      s390x-0.4.6         0eaed2e8996f        4 weeks ago          173MB

**Step 3.9:** Navigate to the directory where the "end-to-end" test
lives:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric$ cd examples/e2e_cli/
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric/examples/e2e_cli$

**Step 3.10:** The end-to-end test that you are about to run will create
several Docker containers. A Docker container is what runs a process,
and it is based on a Docker image. Run this command, which shows all
Docker containers, however right now there will be no output other than
column headings, which indicates no Docker containers are currently
running:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric/examples/e2e_cli$ docker ps -a
    CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND             CREATED             STATUS              PORTS               NAMES

**Step 3.11:** Run the end-to-end test with this command:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric/examples/e2e_cli$ ./network_setup.sh up mychannel 10 couchdb
      .
      . (output not shown here)
      .
    ===================== Query on PEER3 on channel 'mychannel' is successful =====================

    ===================== All GOOD, End-2-End execution completed =====================
      .
      . (output not shown here)
      .

**Step 3.12:** Run the *docker ps* command to see the Docker containers
that the test created:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric/examples/e2e_cli$ docker ps -a
    CONTAINER ID        IMAGE                                                                                                  COMMAND                  CREATED              STATUS                     PORTS                                                                       NAMES
    9ca69f0d2128        dev-peer1.org2.example.com-mycc-1.0-26c2ef32838554aac4f7ad6f100aca865e87959c9a126e86d764c8d01f8346ab   "chaincode -peer.a..."   42 seconds ago       Up 41 seconds                                                                                           dev-peer1.org2.example.com-mycc-1.0
    5db95fdf7c9c        dev-peer0.org1.example.com-mycc-1.0-384f11f484b9302df90b453200cfb25174305fce8f53f4e94d45ee3b6cab0ce9   "chaincode -peer.a..."   About a minute ago   Up 59 seconds                                                                                           dev-peer0.org1.example.com-mycc-1.0
    e53a8a16aeea        dev-peer0.org2.example.com-mycc-1.0-15b571b3ce849066b7ec74497da3b27e54e0df1345daff3951b94245ce09c42b   "chaincode -peer.a..."   About a minute ago   Up About a minute                                                                                       dev-peer0.org2.example.com-mycc-1.0
    767ed190d28a        hyperledger/fabric-tools                                                                               "/bin/bash -c './s..."   2 minutes ago        Exited (0) 31 seconds ago                                                                               cli
    69444f336fcb        hyperledger/fabric-orderer                                                                             "orderer"                2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                0.0.0.0:7050->7050/tcp                                                      orderer.example.com
    faf771f1110c        hyperledger/fabric-peer                                                                                "peer node start"        2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                0.0.0.0:9051->7051/tcp, 0.0.0.0:9052->7052/tcp, 0.0.0.0:9053->7053/tcp      peer0.org2.example.com
    ce11df66c093        hyperledger/fabric-peer                                                                                "peer node start"        2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                0.0.0.0:10051->7051/tcp, 0.0.0.0:10052->7052/tcp, 0.0.0.0:10053->7053/tcp   peer1.org2.example.com
    f1f4bd1c7b77        hyperledger/fabric-kafka                                                                               "/docker-entrypoin..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                9093/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32778->9092/tcp                                           kafka0
    f94e92ea6a0f        hyperledger/fabric-kafka                                                                               "/docker-entrypoin..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                9093/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32780->9092/tcp                                           kafka1
    5fd6364b8392        hyperledger/fabric-kafka                                                                               "/docker-entrypoin..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                9093/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32779->9092/tcp                                           kafka2
    aa4b90dffeb5        hyperledger/fabric-peer                                                                                "peer node start"        2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                0.0.0.0:7051-7053->7051-7053/tcp                                            peer0.org1.example.com
    8fc50a5b5a14        hyperledger/fabric-peer                                                                                "peer node start"        2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                0.0.0.0:8051->7051/tcp, 0.0.0.0:8052->7052/tcp, 0.0.0.0:8053->7053/tcp      peer1.org1.example.com
    f64ba4f7b1fd        hyperledger/fabric-kafka                                                                               "/docker-entrypoin..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                9093/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32777->9092/tcp                                           kafka3
    99ce8283647f        hyperledger/fabric-zookeeper                                                                           "/docker-entrypoin..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                0.0.0.0:32776->2181/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32775->2888/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32774->3888/tcp   zookeeper2
    ec5bf9d56a26        hyperledger/fabric-couchdb                                                                             "tini -- /docker-e..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                4369/tcp, 9100/tcp, 0.0.0.0:5984->5984/tcp                                  couchdb0
    4e413ab38874        hyperledger/fabric-couchdb                                                                             "tini -- /docker-e..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                4369/tcp, 9100/tcp, 0.0.0.0:7984->5984/tcp                                  couchdb2
    593b801b97fc        hyperledger/fabric-couchdb                                                                             "tini -- /docker-e..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                4369/tcp, 9100/tcp, 0.0.0.0:6984->5984/tcp                                  couchdb1
    d73ae16c9842        hyperledger/fabric-zookeeper                                                                           "/docker-entrypoin..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                0.0.0.0:32773->2181/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32772->2888/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32771->3888/tcp   zookeeper1
    a02f236e3a75        hyperledger/fabric-zookeeper                                                                           "/docker-entrypoin..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                0.0.0.0:32770->2181/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32769->2888/tcp, 0.0.0.0:32768->3888/tcp   zookeeper0
    c2781779f70e        hyperledger/fabric-couchdb                                                                             "tini -- /docker-e..."   2 minutes ago        Up 2 minutes                4369/tcp, 9100/tcp, 0.0.0.0:8984->5984/tcp                                  couchdb3

The first three Docker containers listed are chaincode containers- The
chaincode was run on three of the four peers, so they each had a Docker
image and container created. There were also four peer containers
created, each with a couchdb container, and one orderer container. The
orderer service uses *Kafka* for consensus, and so is supported by four
Kafka containers and three Zookeeper containers. There was a container
created to run the CLI itself, and that container stopped running ten
seconds after the test ended. (That was what the value *10* was for in
the *./network\_setup.sh* command you ran).

You have successfully run the CLI end-to-end test. You will clean things
up now.

**Step 3.13:** Run the *network\_setup.sh* script with different
arguments to bring the Docker containers down:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric/examples/e2e_cli$ ./network_setup.sh down

**Step 3.14:** Try the *docker ps* command again and you should see that
there are no longer any Docker containers running:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric/examples/e2e_cli$ docker ps -a
    CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND             CREATED             STATUS              PORTS               NAMES

**Recap:** In this section, you:

-   Downloaded the main Hyperledger Fabric source code repository
-   Installed prerequisite tools required to build the Hyperledger
    Fabric project
-   Ran *make* to build the project's Docker images
-   Ran the Hyperledger Fabric command line interface (CLI) end-to-end
    test

\* Cleaned up afterwards â€ƒ Section 4: Install the Hyperledger Fabric
Certificate Authority
===============================================================

In the prior section, the end-to-end test that you ran supplied its own
security-related material such as keys and certificates- everything it
needed to perform its test. Therefore it did not need the services of a
Certificate Authority.

Almost all \"real world\" Hyperledger Fabric networks will not be this
static- new users, peers and organizations will probably join the
network. They will need PKI x.509 certificates in order to participate.
The Hyperledger Fabric Certificate Authority (CA) is provided by the
Hyperledger Fabric project in order to issue these certificates.

The next major goal in this lab is to run the Hyperledger Fabric Node.js
SDK's end-to-end test. This test makes calls to the Hyperledger Fabric
Certificate Authority (CA). Therefore, before we can run that test, you
will get started by downloading and building the Hyperledger Fabric CA.

**Step 4.1:** Use *cd* to navigate three directory levels up, to the
*hyperledger* directory:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric/examples/e2e_cli$ cd ~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger$

**Step 4.2:** Get the source code for the v1.1.0 release of the Fabric
CA using *git*:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger$ git clone -b v1.1.0 https://gerrit.hyperledger.org/r/fabric-ca
    Cloning into 'fabric-ca'...
    remote: Counting objects: 15, done
    remote: Total 10048 (delta 0), reused 10048 (delta 0)
    Receiving objects: 100% (10048/10048), 24.65 MiB | 2.66 MiB/s, done.
    Resolving deltas: 100% (3535/3535), done.
    Checking connectivity... done.
    Note: checking out 'f69f53bfc4248d5f17e7a56072b634032decab35'.

    You are in 'detached HEAD' state. You can look around, make experimental
    changes and commit them, and you can discard any commits you make in this
    state without impacting any branches by performing another checkout.

    If you want to create a new branch to retain commits you create, you may
    do so (now or later) by using -b with the checkout command again. Example:

      git checkout -b <new-branch-name

**Step 4.3:** Navigate to the *fabric-ca* directory, which is the top
directory of where the *git* command put the code it just downloaded:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger$ cd fabric-ca
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-ca$

**Step 4.4:** Enter the following command, which will build the
Hyperledger Fabric CA images. Just like you did with the *fabric* repo,
'wrap' the *make* command, which is what will do all the work, in a
*time* command, which will give you a measure of the time, including
'wall clock' time, required to build the images:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-ca $ time make docker
      .
      .  (output not shown here)
      .
    real   2m0.509s
    user   0m0.148s
    sys    0m0.195s
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-ca$

**Step 4.5:** Enter the *docker images* command and you will see at the
top of the output the Docker images that were just created for the
Fabric Certificate Authority:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-ca$ docker images
    REPOSITORY                      TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED              SIZE
    hyperledger/fabric-ca-tools     latest              c001ed8ba789        56 seconds ago       1.43GB
    hyperledger/fabric-ca-tools     s390x-1.1.0         c001ed8ba789        56 seconds ago       1.43GB
    hyperledger/fabric-ca-peer      latest              6fb441f2c0bd        About a minute ago   271MB
    hyperledger/fabric-ca-peer      s390x-1.1.0         6fb441f2c0bd        About a minute ago   271MB
    hyperledger/fabric-ca-orderer   latest              06391fff8d54        About a minute ago   265MB
    hyperledger/fabric-ca-orderer   s390x-1.1.0         06391fff8d54        About a minute ago   265MB
    hyperledger/fabric-ca           latest              2ac752a91a56        About a minute ago   292MB
    hyperledger/fabric-ca           s390x-1.1.0         2ac752a91a56        About a minute ago   292MB

      .
      . (remaining output not shown here)
      .

You may have noticed that for many of the images, the *Image ID* appears
twice, once with a tag of *latest*, and once with a tag such as
*s390x-1.1.0*. An image can be actually be given any number of tags.
Think of these *tags* as nicknames, or aliases. In our case the *make*
process first gave the Docker image it created a descriptive tag,
*s390x-1.1.0*, and then it also 'tagged' it with a new tag, *latest*. It
did that for a reason. When you are working with Docker images, if you
specify an image without specifying a tag, the tag defaults to the name
*latest*. So, for example, using the above output, you can specify
either *hyperledger/fabric-ca*, *hyperledger/fabric-ca:latest*, or
*hyperledger/fabric-ca:s390x-1.1.0*, and in all three cases you are
asking for the same image, the image with ID *2ac752a91a56*.

**Recap:** In this section, you downloaded the source code for the
Hyperledger Fabric Certificate Authority and built it. That was easy. â€ƒ
Section 5: Install Hyperledger Fabric Node.js SDK and its prerequisite
software
===============================================================================
The preferred way for an application to interact with a Hyperledger
Fabric chaincode is through a Software Development Kit (SDK) that
exposes APIs. The Hyperledger Fabric Node.js SDK is very popular among
developers, due to the popularity of JavaScript as a programming
language for developing web applications and the popularity of Node.js
as a runtime platform for running server-side JavaScript.

In this section, you will install and configure Node.js, which also
includes a program called *npm*, which is the de facto Node.js package
manager.

Then you will download the Hyperledger Fabric Node.js SDK and install
npm packages that it requires.

**Step 5.1:** Change to the */tmp* directory:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-ca$ cd /tmp
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$

**Step 5.2:** Retrieve the *Node.js* package with this command:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$ wget https://nodejs.org/dist/v8.9.4/node-v8.9.4-linux-s390x.tar.xz
    --2018-03-20 10:02:59--  https://nodejs.org/dist/v8.9.4/node-v8.9.4-linux-s390x.tar.xz
    Resolving nodejs.org (nodejs.org)... 104.20.23.46, 104.20.22.46, 2400:cb00:2048:1::6814:162e, ...
    Connecting to nodejs.org (nodejs.org)|104.20.23.46|:443... connected.
    HTTP request sent, awaiting response... 200 OK
    Length: 10977964 (10M) [application/x-xz]
    Saving to: 'node-v8.9.4-linux-s390x.tar.xz'

    node-v8.9.4-linux-s390x.tar.xz                   100%[=========================================================================================================>]  10.47M  16.6MB/s    in 0.6s    

    2018-03-20 10:03:00 (16.6 MB/s) - 'node-v8.9.4-linux-s390x.tar.xz' saved [10977964/10977964]

**Step 5.3:** Extract the package underneath your home directory,
*/home/bcuser*. This will cause the executables to wind up in
*/home/bcuser/bin*, which is in your path:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$ cd /home/bcuser && tar --strip-components=1 -xf /tmp/node-v8.9.4-linux-s390x.tar.xz

**Step 5.4:** Issue this command to see where *node* resides within your
path:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$ which node
    /home/bcuser/bin/node

**Step 5.5:** Issue this command to see where *npm* resides within your
path:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp $ which npm
    /home/bcuser/bin/npm

**Step 5.6:** Issue this command to see which version of *node* is
installed:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp $ node --version
    v8.9.4

**Step 5.7:** Issue this command to see which version of *npm* is
installed:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:/tmp$ npm --version
    5.6.0

**Step 5.8:** Switch to the *\~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger*
directory:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~$ cd ~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger$

**Step 5.9:** Now you will download the version 1.1.0 release of the
Hyperledger Fabric Node SDK source code from its official repository:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044: ~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger $ git clone -b v1.1.0 https://gerrit.hyperledger.org/r/fabric-sdk-node
    Cloning into 'fabric-sdk-node'...
    remote: Counting objects: 387, done
    remote: Finding sources: 100% (3/3)
    remote: Total 7475 (delta 0), reused 7474 (delta 0)
    Receiving objects: 100% (7475/7475), 4.60 MiB | 2.18 MiB/s, done.
    Resolving deltas: 100% (3627/3627), done.
    Checking connectivity... done.
    Note: checking out '46fc443fa8560032e8e77d4689581718190926c5'.

    You are in 'detached HEAD' state. You can look around, make experimental
    changes and commit them, and you can discard any commits you make in this
    state without impacting any branches by performing another checkout.

    If you want to create a new branch to retain commits you create, you may
    do so (now or later) by using -b with the checkout command again. Example:

      git checkout -b <new-branch-name>

**Step 5.10:** Change to the *fabric-sdk-node* directory which was just
created:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044: ~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger $ cd fabric-sdk-node
    bcuser@ubuntu16044: ~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$

**Step 5.11:** You are about to install the packages that the
Hyperledger Fabric Node SDK would like to use. Before you start, run
*npm list* to see that you are starting with a blank slate:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ npm list
    fabric-sdk-node@1.1.0 /home/bcuser/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node
    `-- (empty)

    bcuser@ubuntu16044: ~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$

**Step 5.12:** Run *npm install* to install the required packages. This
will take a few minutes and will produce a lot of output:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044: ~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ npm install
      .
      . (output not shown here)
      .
    npm notice created a lockfile as package-lock.json. You should commit this file.
    npm WARN optional SKIPPING OPTIONAL DEPENDENCY: fsevents@1.1.3 (node_modules/fsevents):
    npm WARN notsup SKIPPING OPTIONAL DEPENDENCY: Unsupported platform for fsevents@1.1.3: wanted {"os":"darwin","arch":"any"} (current: {"os":"linux","arch":"s390x"})

    added 1048 packages in 290.505s

You may ignore the *WARN* messages throughout the output, and there may
even be some messages that look like error messages, but the npm
installation program may be expecting such conditions and working
through it. If there is a serious error, the end of the output will
leave little doubt about it.

**Step 5.13:** Repeat the *npm list* command. The output, although not
shown here, will be anything but empty. This just proves what everyone
suspected- programmers would much rather use other peoples' code than
write their own. Not that there's anything wrong with that. You can even
steal this lab if you want to. :: <bcuser@ubuntu16044>:
\~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node\$ npm list . . (output
not shown here, but surely you will agree it is not empty) .
<bcuser@ubuntu16044>:
\~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node\$

**Step 5.14:** The tests use an automation tool named *gulp*, but before
you install it, run the *which* command. The silent treatment it gives
you confirms it is not available to you:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ which gulp
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ 

**Step 5.15:** Now install *gulp* at a global level, using the *-g*
argument to the *npm install*. This makes the package available on a
system-wide basis:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ npm install -g gulp
      .
      .  (output not shown here)
      .

**Step 5.16:** Running *which* again shows that *gulp* is available to
you now:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ which gulp
    /home/bcuser/bin/gulp
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$

**Step 5.17:** Next you will install a code coverage testing tool named
*istanbul*, also at a global level. But first, use *which* to prove it
isn\'t there yet:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ which istanbul
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ 

**Step 5.18:** Install it globally:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ npm install -g istanbul
    /home/bcuser/bin/istanbul -> /home/bcuser/lib/node_modules/istanbul/lib/cli.js
    + istanbul@0.4.5
    added 60 packages in 1.211s

**Step 5.19:** Prove it worked:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ which istanbul
    /home/bcuser/bin/istanbul
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$

**Recap:** In this section, you:

-   Installed Node.js and npm
-   Downloaded the Hyperledger Fabric Node.js SDK
-   Installed the *npm* packages required by the Hyperledger Fabric
    Node.js SDK

\* Installed the *gulp* and *istanbul* packages so that you are ready to
run the Hyperledger Fabric Node.js SDK end-to-end test (which you will
do in the next section) â€ƒ Section 6: Run the Hyperledger Fabric Node.js
SDK end-to-end test
================================================================= In
this section, you will run two tests provided by the Hyperledger Fabric
Node.js SDK, verify their successful operation, and clean up afterwards.

The first test is a quick test that takes a little over twenty seconds,
and does not bring up any chaincode containers. The second test is the
\"end-to-end\" test, as it is much more comprehensive and will bring up
several chaincode containers and will take a few minutes.

**Step 6.1:** The first test is very simple and can be run simply by
running *npm test*:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ npm test
      .
      . (initial output not shown)
      .
    1..1083
    # tests 1083
    # pass  1083

    # ok

    -------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------------|
    File                           |  % Stmts | % Branch |  % Funcs |  % Lines |Uncovered Lines |
    -------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------------|
     fabric-ca-client/lib/         |    65.29 |     61.4 |    55.26 |    65.29 |                |
      AffiliationService.js        |    66.67 |       70 |      100 |    66.67 |... 194,195,198 |
      FabricCAClientImpl.js        |    64.26 |    61.02 |    48.33 |    64.26 |... 924,926,929 |
      IdentityService.js           |    65.79 |       50 |    66.67 |    65.79 |... 254,255,258 |
      helper.js                    |      100 |      100 |      100 |      100 |                |
     fabric-client/lib/            |    67.73 |    62.67 |     68.7 |    67.85 |                |
      BaseClient.js                |     96.3 |    91.67 |      100 |     96.3 |            119 |
      BlockDecoder.js              |     71.5 |       52 |    72.22 |    71.83 |... 4,1326,1327 |
      CertificateAuthority.js      |      100 |      100 |      100 |      100 |                |
      Channel.js                   |    49.58 |     45.4 |    57.89 |    49.47 |... 1,2343,2346 |
      ChannelEventHub.js           |    62.98 |    55.08 |    65.22 |    63.34 |... 3,1294,1296 |
      Client.js                    |    72.79 |    72.44 |    77.94 |    72.82 |... 6,1929,1932 |
      Config.js                    |    91.43 |       75 |      100 |    91.43 |      65,83,100 |
      Constants.js                 |      100 |      100 |      100 |      100 |                |
      EventHub.js                  |    69.91 |    65.85 |    67.74 |    70.37 |... 821,826,833 |
      Orderer.js                   |       50 |    35.71 |     62.5 |       50 |... 285,286,289 |
      Organization.js              |    84.78 |       80 |    93.33 |    86.05 |... 122,123,126 |
      Packager.js                  |    91.67 |    91.67 |      100 |    91.67 |          57,58 |
      Peer.js                      |    80.43 |     62.5 |    88.89 |    80.43 |... 140,142,143 |
      Policy.js                    |    99.07 |    92.16 |      100 |    99.07 |            169 |
      Remote.js                    |    97.78 |       90 |      100 |    97.78 |        102,114 |
      TransactionID.js             |       96 |     87.5 |      100 |       96 |             48 |
      User.js                      |    88.24 |    67.31 |       80 |    88.24 |... 226,246,253 |
      api.js                       |      100 |      100 |        0 |      100 |                |
      client-utils.js              |    73.95 |    58.97 |    73.33 |    73.95 |... 223,225,227 |
      hash.js                      |    45.59 |        0 |    10.53 |    45.59 |... 137,148,157 |
      utils.js                     |    79.41 |    72.88 |    77.78 |    79.41 |... 400,459,538 |
     fabric-client/lib/impl/       |    65.28 |    60.39 |    61.22 |     65.3 |                |
      CouchDBKeyValueStore.js      |    77.33 |       60 |    93.33 |    78.08 |... 158,171,172 |
      CryptoKeyStore.js            |      100 |     87.5 |      100 |      100 |                |
      CryptoSuite_ECDSA_AES.js     |    84.34 |    80.22 |       75 |    84.34 |... 395,397,398 |
      FileKeyValueStore.js         |    91.89 |    83.33 |      100 |    91.89 |       56,57,74 |
      NetworkConfig_1_0.js         |    98.74 |    85.63 |      100 |    98.72 |    147,412,413 |
      bccsp_pkcs11.js              |    24.86 |    32.24 |     8.33 |    24.93 |... 9,1113,1114 |
     fabric-client/lib/impl/aes/   |    11.11 |        0 |        0 |    11.11 |                |
      pkcs11_key.js                |    11.11 |        0 |        0 |    11.11 |... 52,56,60,64 |
     fabric-client/lib/impl/ecdsa/ |    49.63 |    36.05 |       50 |    51.54 |                |
      key.js                       |      100 |    96.88 |      100 |      100 |                |
      pkcs11_key.js                |    11.69 |        0 |        0 |     12.5 |... 163,164,166 |
     fabric-client/lib/msp/        |    77.19 |    67.61 |    67.86 |    77.51 |                |
      identity.js                  |       90 |       76 |    76.92 |       90 |... ,86,104,212 |
      msp-manager.js               |    76.36 |    72.73 |    83.33 |    77.36 |... 129,130,159 |
      msp.js                       |    68.18 |    54.17 |    44.44 |    68.18 |... 137,138,180 |
     fabric-client/lib/packager/   |    90.35 |    77.27 |    76.92 |    90.35 |                |
      BasePackager.js              |    84.62 |    66.67 |       75 |    84.62 |... 150,173,191 |
      Car.js                       |       60 |      100 |        0 |       60 |          23,24 |
      Golang.js                    |      100 |      100 |      100 |      100 |                |
      Node.js                      |    96.15 |       75 |      100 |    96.15 |             82 |
    -------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------------|
    All files                      |     67.2 |    61.04 |    65.24 |    67.36 |                |
    -------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------------|


    =============================== Coverage summary =============================== 
    Statements   : 67.2% ( 4039/6010 )
    Branches     : 61.04% ( 1695/2777 )
    Functions    : 65.24% ( 456/699 )
    Lines        : 67.36% ( 4018/5965 )
    ================================================================================
    [11:28:50] Finished 'test-headless' after 23 s

You may have seen some messages scroll by that looked like errors or
exceptions, but chances are they were expected to occur within the test
cases- the key indicator of this is that of the 1083 tests, all of them
passed.

**Step 6.2:** Run the end-to-end tests with the *gulp test* command.
While this command is running, a little bit of the output may look like
errors, but some of the tests expect errors, so the real indicator is,
again, like the first test, whether or not all tests passed:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ gulp test
      .
      . (lots of output not shown here)
      . 

    1..1776
    # tests 1776
    # pass  1776

    # ok

    -------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------------|
    File                           |  % Stmts | % Branch |  % Funcs |  % Lines |Uncovered Lines |
    -------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------------|
     fabric-ca-client/lib/         |    94.36 |    89.47 |    90.79 |    94.36 |                |
      AffiliationService.js        |    98.33 |       96 |      100 |    98.33 |            195 |
      FabricCAClientImpl.js        |    94.04 |     88.7 |       90 |    94.04 |... 918,926,929 |
      IdentityService.js           |    92.11 |    84.62 |    88.89 |    92.11 |... 246,249,255 |
      helper.js                    |      100 |      100 |      100 |      100 |                |
     fabric-client/lib/            |    86.84 |    78.72 |     83.7 |    86.98 |                |
      BaseClient.js                |     96.3 |    91.67 |      100 |     96.3 |            119 |
      BlockDecoder.js              |    91.71 |       65 |    98.15 |    92.17 |... 8,1323,1324 |
      CertificateAuthority.js      |      100 |      100 |      100 |      100 |                |
      Channel.js                   |    78.38 |    71.31 |    81.58 |    78.45 |... 1,2343,2346 |
      ChannelEventHub.js           |    88.55 |    82.63 |    89.13 |    88.68 |... 2,1289,1296 |
      Client.js                    |    90.47 |    83.37 |    89.71 |    90.43 |... 6,1929,1932 |
      Config.js                    |    94.29 |     87.5 |      100 |    94.29 |         83,100 |
      Constants.js                 |      100 |      100 |      100 |      100 |                |
      EventHub.js                  |     92.1 |    84.55 |    93.55 |    92.59 |... 761,817,826 |
      Orderer.js                   |    79.23 |     62.5 |     87.5 |    79.23 |... 285,286,289 |
      Organization.js              |    84.78 |       80 |    93.33 |    86.05 |... 122,123,126 |
      Packager.js                  |    91.67 |    91.67 |      100 |    91.67 |          57,58 |
      Peer.js                      |    93.48 |    81.25 |      100 |    93.48 |    135,142,143 |
      Policy.js                    |    99.07 |    92.16 |      100 |    99.07 |            169 |
      Remote.js                    |      100 |    95.71 |      100 |      100 |                |
      TransactionID.js             |       96 |     87.5 |      100 |       96 |             48 |
      User.js                      |    91.76 |    73.08 |    86.67 |    91.76 |... 220,225,226 |
      api.js                       |      100 |      100 |        0 |      100 |                |
      client-utils.js              |    94.12 |    76.92 |      100 |    94.12 |... 210,223,225 |
      hash.js                      |    45.59 |        0 |    10.53 |    45.59 |... 137,148,157 |
      utils.js                     |    79.83 |    74.58 |    77.78 |    79.83 |... 400,459,538 |
     fabric-client/lib/impl/       |    66.16 |    61.27 |    62.24 |    66.08 |                |
      CouchDBKeyValueStore.js      |       88 |       70 |      100 |    87.67 |... 158,171,172 |
      CryptoKeyStore.js            |      100 |     87.5 |      100 |      100 |                |
      CryptoSuite_ECDSA_AES.js     |    84.34 |    80.22 |       75 |    84.34 |... 395,397,398 |
      FileKeyValueStore.js         |    91.89 |    83.33 |      100 |    91.89 |       56,57,74 |
      NetworkConfig_1_0.js         |    98.74 |    86.78 |      100 |    98.72 |    147,412,413 |
      bccsp_pkcs11.js              |    24.86 |    32.24 |     8.33 |    24.93 |... 9,1113,1114 |
     fabric-client/lib/impl/aes/   |    11.11 |        0 |        0 |    11.11 |                |
      pkcs11_key.js                |    11.11 |        0 |        0 |    11.11 |... 52,56,60,64 |
     fabric-client/lib/impl/ecdsa/ |    49.63 |    36.05 |       50 |    51.54 |                |
      key.js                       |      100 |    96.88 |      100 |      100 |                |
      pkcs11_key.js                |    11.69 |        0 |        0 |     12.5 |... 163,164,166 |
     fabric-client/lib/msp/        |    78.36 |    69.01 |    71.43 |     78.7 |                |
      identity.js                  |       94 |       80 |    84.62 |       94 |      42,86,104 |
      msp-manager.js               |    76.36 |    72.73 |    83.33 |    77.36 |... 129,130,159 |
      msp.js                       |    68.18 |    54.17 |    44.44 |    68.18 |... 137,138,180 |
     fabric-client/lib/packager/   |    90.35 |    77.27 |    76.92 |    90.35 |                |
      BasePackager.js              |    84.62 |    66.67 |       75 |    84.62 |... 150,173,191 |
      Car.js                       |       60 |      100 |        0 |       60 |          23,24 |
      Golang.js                    |      100 |      100 |      100 |      100 |                |
      Node.js                      |    96.15 |       75 |      100 |    96.15 |             82 |
    -------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------------|
    All files                      |    82.91 |    74.11 |    79.26 |     83.1 |                |
    -------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------------|


    =============================== Coverage summary =============================== 
    Statements   : 82.91% ( 4983/6010 )
    Branches     : 74.11% ( 2058/2777 )
    Functions    : 79.26% ( 554/699 )
    Lines        : 83.1% ( 4957/5965 )
    ================================================================================
    [11:39:54] Finished 'test' after 7.82 min
    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$

**Step 6.3:** (Optional) What I really like about the second end-to-end
test is that it cleans itself up really well at the beginning- that is,
it will remove any artifacts left running at the end of the prior test,
so if you wanted to, you could simply enter *gulp test* again if you\'d
like to see this for yourself and have several minutes to spare. If
you\'re pressed for time, skip this step:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ gulp test
      .
      . (output not shown here)
      . 

**Step 6.4:** Enter this command to see what Docker containers were
created as part of the test:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ docker ps -a

**Step 6.5:** Enter this command to see that some Docker images for
chaincode have been created as part of the test. These are the images
that start with *dev-*:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ docker images

**Step 6.6:** You will now clean up. You will do this by running only
the parts \"hidden\" within the *gulp test* command execution that do
the initial cleanup:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ gulp clean-up pre-test docker-clean

**Step 6.7:** Now observe that all Docker containers have been stopped
and removed by entering this command:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ docker ps -a

**Step 6.8:** And enter this comand and see that all chaincode images
(those starting with *dev-*) have been removed:

    bcuser@ubuntu16044:~/git/src/github.com/hyperledger/fabric-sdk-node$ docker images

**Recap:** In this section, you ran the Hyperledger Fabric Node.js SDK
end-to-end tests and then you cleaned up its leftover artifacts
afterward. This completes this lab. You have downloaded and built a
Hyperledger Fabric network and verified that the setup is correct by
successfully running two end-to-end tests- the CLI end-to-end test and
the Node.js SDK end-to-end test- and the shorter Node.js SDK test.

If you really wanted to dig into the details of how the Hyperledger
Fabric works, you could do worse than to drill down into the details of
each of these tests.

**\* End of Lab!**\*
